[dramatic music]
*
- My name is Mark Steel Knapp.
With my middle name Steel,
to me it means
I'm a steel knife-maker.
So I couldn't help but be that.
And as far as my last name goes,
I'm pretty good at napping, too.
- My name's Dan Roplad.
I just love making knives.
My first memory,
I was a little baby
and I was given
a plastic serrated knife
and I cut myself with it
and I was indignant
that the adults
had given me something
that could hurt me.
But for some reason--
maybe it's that--
I always go back
to making knives.
- My name's Christopher Price.
I am fascinated
by historical bladesmithing
because it acts as
a portal back in time.
And there's a little bit of
magic in it that I just love.
- I am Holden Mystery. I'm 18.
Nowadays it seems like
everybody's got to go
to college,
be a doctor or whatever.
But I'm not doing
the conventional thing.
I don't try to be
different on purpose.
It's just who I am.
I can't help it.
I just can't help
but make blades.
*
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to the Forge.
You're here for three rounds
of edged weapon making
competition designed to test
every aspect
of your capabilities.
At the end of each round,
you'll be presenting your work
to our panel of expert judges.
They decide which of you will be
the "Forged in Fire" Champion
who also leaves here
with that check for $10,000.
Let's go ahead
and meet them now.
ABS master smith,
J. Neilson.
Historic weapons recreation
specialist, David Baker.
Edged weapon specialist,
Doug Marcaida.
Today, we won't be providing you
with any pristine
high-carbon steel.
We like to throw a monkey wrench
into the works.
Quite literally.
*
You will be forging
signature blades
in your signature style
from these pipe wrenches.
- Wrenches.
What the hell am I gonna do
with those?
- In an order chosen at random,
you will select your wrench.
Mark, you're up first.
- I want to make sure
that I have enough material
to make the knife
that I want to make.
So I choose the biggest
wrench in the pile.
- Was there a bigger one up here
that you
could have chosen, Mark?
- I picked the biggest one.
- All right. Holden,
please move forward
and select your steel.
- Big ones, some little ones,
all kinds of pipe wrenches.
I don't want anything so big
that I have to hold it
in the forge
'cause I'm pretty lazy.
So that's why I picked
the one I did.
- Daniel, you're up.
- I have no idea what steel
is in these wrenches.
The handle's probably not good.
The jaws probably, but--
[poofs air]
I don't know.
- Chris, please
select your steel.
- I'm the last one to pick,
so I look for the one
that's got the most jaw
'cause I don't want to use
the handle.
It's too hard of a shape
to forge out.
- Keep in mind
that in the second round
you'll be putting handles
on those blades
to turn them into
fully-functional weapons
that will be tested for strength
and durability
hammering through a copper pipe
and for edge retention
in a rope slice.
You will have 10 minutes
to work on your designs.
You will have three hours
to forge your blades.
Your 10-minute design window
starts... now.
[upbeat rock music]
*
- I'm making a broken back seax
because it's a very
versatile tool.
The last year has been
really challenging.
My wife passed away from
a long fight with breast cancer
and it's been hard
to get myself out of my shell.
But one of the things
my wife made clear
was that we should move on.
And so this is part of that
for me.
I don't know if she's
looking down on me,
but I hope what I'm doing
honors her memory.
- I'm gonna make a cross between
a camp knife and a bowie.
I think it'll work really well
for the test.
It's gonna be pretty beefy
on the back,
so it'll support that edge,
and yet still be thin enough
so that it will be able
to slice through the rope.
I don't know if I'll be the next
"Forged in Fire" champion.
I hope so. I've got the skills.
I got the potential.
I'm awesome. [laughs]
- I'm making a bolo because
it has a big belly to it.
It will cut through
that copper pipe and that rope.
Back home, there's a lot
of people rooting for me,
you know, that's great.
That's awesome.
'Cause, you know, whoo!
[laughs]
*
- The style of my blade
is just gonna be a big chopper.
I think what drew me to this
competition is the challenge.
Being taken out of my box
and being challenged
to do things
that I had never done before.
I'm excited about it.
- Bladesmiths, your design
period is now closed.
Your three-hour forge time
starts now.
Monkey wrenches, pipe wrenches,
whatever you want to call it,
there's a lot of steel
there to work with.
- I guess our guys are gonna be
monkeying around
for a while, huh?
- Here we go. Here we go.
- [laughing]
- I have no ididwhat.
I'm assuming the jaws
are the best,
but I'm gonna do a spark test.
If you get a complex burst
of sparks coming out of them,
then it's a high-carbon steel.
- The jaws are kicking off
a crazy amount of sparks.
- Yep.
- The jaws of the wrenches
has to be the best steel,
so that's definitely
what I'm gonna have to use.
My first plan of attack
is don't panic.
[bleep].
If something happens,
I say a few choice words
and then I just move right on.
[bleep].
*
- I know right away
that I'm going to use a jaw.
- I like Mark's idea of grabbing
the big pipe wrench,
take the top of the jaw off,
and forge a blade out of that.
- The upper jaw was here.
So this is the threaded
shaft of it.
We're not sure
what steel this is.
Now I have a straight piece.
Gonna start drawing it out
as quickly as I can.
*
- I just saw Chris put stockings
on his arms.
- They're to keep from burning
his forearms.
- Yeah.
- I decide to go
with the upper jaw,
and the first thing I have
to get rid of are the teeth.
They're just nothing
but trouble.
- Well, he won't have to worry
about the cold shuts
building up between those teeth.
- I know this competition
can be really challenging,
but one of the things
that keeps me centered
is my practice of Zen Buddhism.
I have the ability
to always take myself
out of an extreme position
and focus on
what's in front of me,
and I think that'll help me
in this competition.
*
- Holden has an interesting
thing going on with his shell
and pouch or--
- I didn't want to comment on it
just in case he's a wizard
of some kind.
- I got Barbie parts.
I got a shell.
And I got a coyote tail.
My apron was one
of those cheap aprons,
but pieces kept falling off it.
So I just kept
riveting new pieces on.
I love my apron.
It's who I am.
I am going to use the handle
'cause that's already
pretty straight and mostly flat.
- Holden's the only one
that's using the handle portion
of the monkey wrench
and that's concerning.
Those handles are
an I-beam construction,
so it's really easy
to forge in cold shuts
when you've got to
flatten that out.
- As he smashes it down,
it'll roll in on itself.
- Right.
- Creating bad pockets
right in there.
- I got to get it done quickly
without cold shuts,
and that's turning out
to be a little difficult.
- You have only two hours
remaining to finish your work.
- Only?
- Daniel's blade
is coming along nice.
- I'm kind of in the zone
of just really focusing on me
and the time
and what I need to do.
I start going with a flat grind,
which is not my easiest grind.
Presently I'm just getting
back into knife making.
I stopped working with knives
and started doing artwork
for a number of years.
I'm most nervous of making
a fool of myself.
One thing I don't want is
to go out in the first round.
But we'll see.
[chuckles]
*
- When I work with a mystery
metal that I don't know
what its heat treatment schedule
was like,
you have to experiment
a little bit.
Looking at the broken
end of this
and I'm looking for
how big the structure inside is.
- Chris did what I've been
waiting four seasons
for somebody to do.
He took recycled material,
heated it, quenched it,
and snapped it
to see the grain structure.
That's gonna tell him how
he should heat-treat the blade.
That is a very, very smart move.
- Now I know how hot
it's got to get,
how many times I've got to
thermally cycle it
to get it to work,
and what its durability is.
And that's
really valuable information.
- I have forged
the blade to shape.
- Mark is a machine.
That guy is just knocking it
out of the park.
- I'm just checking
for any cracks.
making sure I've got
everything centered.
So far, so good.
It's time to move on
to the normalizing.
*
I see that the blade is warping.
[bleep].
- It worries me if Mark is
getting bends in his blade now
and he hasn't quenched yet.
That doesn't bode well
for the quench.
- Sometimes this competition
comes down to
a warped blade
over an unwarped blade,
and sometime it's the warped
blade that has to go home.
I'm gonna do everything I can
to straighten the blade
before I quench.
*
- I'm not doing so well.
I'm seeing a lot of cold shuts.
This is intense.
I start flattening it out.
- It looks like he's trying
to force those lips down.
- I have a feeling
that they're folding over.
- Yeah.
- They're creating some spots.
- I see a crack.
Actually, more than one crack.
- That handle section of steel
is a lost cause right now.
- I continue with
this cracked blade
that I know for a fact
will just shatter in heat-treat.
I'll get disqualified.
Some say it's insane to do
things more than once, but...
I got to start again.
- With a hour left,
he's starting a whole new blade.
He's made a decision
to go with the jaws
of the pipe wrench.
- That's a smart choice.
- But he needs to kick it
into high gear
because these other smiths
are not amateurs.
- In my mind, I got to do this
in half the amount of time
that I'm supposed to,
and already
the three hours was a crunch.
It's that nagging in the back
of your head like,
"You got to get done now,
now, now, now, now."
*
- I'm feeling pretty good.
I got my pipe wrench
forged out into a blade.
But until it's been properly
hardened, it's not a knife.
- Look at that. Look at that.
Oh, yeah.
- There he goes. That's nice.
- That's beautiful.
- Now the big concern's
gonna be a warp.
*
- Moment of truth.
I think it'll do.
- I straightened the warp
from the normalizing.
I'm in a good place.
Now, I'm gonna quench
and cross my fingers
and hopefully it'll
come out straight.
*
Some of the mistakes
that bladesmiths make
is they bring the blade out
of the quench oil too soon.
I like to take my time.
It comes out straight.
Yeah.
*
- There it is, Daniel.
Right there.
*
- Ugh, I can't believe it.
It warps like you
wouldn't believe.
It's got a big kink in it.
This is where unknown steel
bites you in the butt.
My choice is to go back in again
or just let it go.
I'm just afraid of going back
through another heat-treat
process.
- So Daniel, with a bent blade,
has laid his blade on the anvil
as if he's done.
- Well, there's still
more things to do.
Namely, he could soften
that spine up.
- And now's the time to do it
while you have the forge.
- Oh, yeah.
*
- Holden's kind of
getting it together.
- I wish I would have started
with the jaw
like everyone else.
I get nervous when I do
the heat-treat,
but I get nervous all the time
over stupid stuff.
It's like spilled milk
or hairy lemons.
- Guy worked his ass off.
Give him credit.
- Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one.
Bladesmiths,
shut down your machines.
Drop your tools.
This round is over.
- When I see everyone else's
blades, I'm like, "Man.
Those are looking pretty nice."
But they didn't have to forge
two times like I did.
So I think I did okay.
*
- Bladesmiths, over the last
three hours,
you took pipe wrenches
and turned them into
signature blades
in your signature style.
Now it's time for the judges
to take a closer look.
Mark, you're up first.
*
- First off,
just love the shape. Very nice.
Your plunge grinds
are beautiful.
It's got a great feel to it.
There's a lot of blade here
but there's not a lot
of weight here,
which is nice to see.
Very well done.
- Thank you.
- Daniel, you're up.
*
- Daniel, I love
the shape of this,
and I really enjoyed
watching you forge it,
but you picked up
a warp, though.
I mean, it's pretty significant.
Why didn't you do anything else
that last ten minutes or so?
- I was just afraid it would
just get worse.
- Okay.
- It's not just a warp.
It's kind of an S.
When you get those it's so hard
to come around them.
That's a concern.
- Chris, your turn.
*
- Chris, solid piece.
The way you tapered it from
the plunge grind to the tip,
also from the spine to the edge.
I'll go as far as saying
it's the "seax-iest" seax
I've ever seen turned in.
- Holden, you're up.
*
- Chasing a bad choice
is something
we've watched smiths do
on this show again
and again and again,
and having the smarts
to change up your plan
is a good thing to do.
- You do have a little bit of
a warp but it's not bad.
There's enough material here
to correct that, I think.
- All right, gentlemen,
the judges have
a final decision to make,
so I'm gonna ask you to leave
your blades on this table
and step off the Forge floor.
*
- That was interesting.
- Yeah.
- All right, judges,
our bladesmiths have completed
their knives, now it's time
to take a closer look.
Let's start with Chris.
- Aside from Chris giving us
a very clean blade,
I love the smart choices
he made.
Beautiful grinds
and it's nice and straight.
- All right, let's go ahead
and take a look
at Mark's work.
*
- Basic, well-executed.
Shows advanced precision.
That's what I like about it.
It looks like it was done
by a machine.
Well-executed.
- All right, let's move on to
Holden's blade on the end there.
- I wasn't sure you had
a chance to finish.
- Yeah, I didn't, either,
but I did.
*
- There's a lot of work
still to do here.
You can see where
those teeth have left
those small little lines.
They're not cracks.
I'd love to see him
grind those out
'cause those are
potential fracture points.
- Holden did a nice piece here.
You know, he never quit.
It's got a little bit
of a warp in it
but it's within grinder range.
That's a solid foundation.
- Let's move on
to Daniel's blade.
*
- I liked what Daniel was doing.
I liked watching him forge
this blade out.
It's got a great profile.
But then you turn
the blade this way
and you got not one warp
but you got two.
It's curving to the left
and then back to the right
at the tip.
We got an S here.
It's like an eel
going through the water.
- Basically, this knife
needs to be reheated--
not just on the spine--
to be straightened.
It needs to be
reheated completely.
- Doug, have you made
your final decision?
- Yes, I have.
- Dave?
- Yep.
- J.?
- Absolutely.
- Let's go tell our smiths.
*
Bladesmiths, the judges have
completed their deliberation
and they've made
a final decision.
The bladesmith leaving
the Forge is...
*
Daniel.
Your blade did not make the cut.
- Daniel, it was a true pleasure
watching you
forge that blade to shape.
You got skills
in there like crazy.
But when it came to the quench,
you pulled such a warp
into that blade
and a twist on top of it
and it was so much more extreme
than any of the other blades,
and that's why we have
to let you go.
- Daniel,
please surrender your blade.
*
- When I heard my name my heart
just dropped into my stomach,
but I have to agree
with the judges' decision.
It was a really bad warp
and I had time to fix it,
which I should have.
- You take it easy.
- There's absolutely no shame
in losing this competition.
You learn from failure.
You have to fail in life
to move forward--
to learn.
*
- Congratulations, bladesmiths.
You've made it into
the second round.
Now that your blades
have been tempered,
it's time to turn them
into fully-functional weapons
by attaching handles to them.
However,
you must include at least
two different types
of handle material
into your handle's
overall construction.
You will have three hours
in this round.
When the time runs out,
your weapons will be tested
for strength and durability
batonning through a copper pipe
and for edge retention
in a rope slice.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your three hours starts... now.
- Off to the pantry they go.
- I'm feeling pretty good about
going into the fit and finish.
My niche in the industry
is elaborate handles.
Maybe I can show a little bit
of what I can do.
Gonna put this white Micarta
on both ends
and then I'm going to put
the cocobolo in the middle.
- It'd be nice to have a light
and dark contrast on a knife.
- I usually take quite a bit
of time to make my handles.
Having to do it in three hours
is gonna be a push.
*
- Chris is set up the best here.
His blade is finished.
- Three hours to do a handle.
It should be something gorgeous.
- For my handle,
I take five different things
from the pantry to build it.
White resin, black resin,
Micarta, copper, and brass.
I feel like going
above and beyond.
I want to win. [laughs]
So it's worth it to me.
*
- I look over at Chris' blade
and it is fantastic.
But I'm not Chris.
I'm Holden.
*
I got a lot of grinding
I need to do
to try and get that warp
out of my blade.
But I can get a handle done
very quickly.
So I'm not worried.
- You know, Holden's got a much
better profile on that edge.
He's knocked that bump
on the front that he had.
- Yep.
- One hour has elapsed.
You have two hours remaining
to finish your work.
*
- I'm taking a little bit
more time on the handle material
than I had hoped.
This cocobolo
doesn't want to cut.
It's a very sticky material.
The drill bit gets heated up,
things start to smoke
and it burns.
And I'm getting frustrated.
[bleep].
*
- Mark's still drilling
through that wood.
- It's gumming up the drill bit.
You got to stop, clean it out.
- It's taking me a lot longer
to get this out
because it just kind of smears
like peanut butter in there.
It's a little bit tight on time.
I'm feeling a little bit
more pressure
than I've felt
the whole process so far.
*
- I fixed all the problems
I needed to do.
Now all I need to do
is my handle.
I don't want to use
any natural materials.
I don't want anything to crack.
So I grab carbon fiber
for the guard
and I find resin pine cone
for the handle.
My plan is to do
a three-part tang construction
where I have a cutout
in the middle
and two slabs on each side.
I think it'll look really cool.
*
- It's time to put my handle
on my knife,
but now that there's epoxy
in there,
it doesn't quite want
to slide down very easy.
- Uh-oh.
- Could be a problem.
Oh, he's going to get a hammer.
That's not good.
- My handle doesn't quite want
to slide down very easy.
- Gentle, gentle, gentle.
- This is how handle material
cracks right here,
ladies and gentlemen.
- I just need to get
this thing on.
But I need to be really gentle
or else I'm screwed.
- The gap is closing.
*
- All right.
- Cool.
- Oh, thank goodness.
- You have just one hour
remaining to finish your work.
- Mark's handle is
looking beautiful.
- The handle may not be
quite polished
the way I want it to be,
but it's good enough
to get a edge on there.
It's the highest priority
at this point.
Cut myself.
- Mark has cut himself
over there.
You can see the blood
on the top of his left hand.
- Things are getting hectic.
Thank you, man.
- No problem.
- Every knife-maker puts
a little bit of blood,
sweat, and tears in every knife
that he makes,
and that one was
a pretty good one.
*
- Feeling pretty damn good.
All I got to do
is slap everything together
and glue the [bleep] out of it.
[bleep].
*
- It appears that Holden
drilled his pinholes
and set them on his tang,
but it looks like
he put one on upside-down
because they're sitting
like this on the tang.
- My scales aren't even.
I don't know how it happened.
Everything was lined up.
- They're offset by almost
a half inch.
- Yeah, so I mean,
if he cuts those down
evenly it's gonna be,
like, a 1-inch high handle.
- Yeah.
- Stuff like this happens
to me all the time.
Don't know why.
I don't want to move
these pieces at all
'cause I don't have the time
to do it right now.
- Here we go.
Grind it all out.
- It's not gonna fall apart.
It's just gonna be
a little weird in the hands,
but it's better than no handle.
*
- Five minutes, bladesmiths.
Five minutes remaining
in this round.
Chris still hasn't peened
that tang over.
He's not gonna do that, Dave?
Right now,
all of that handle material
is just held on with glue.
- I look at the clock.
I look at my blade
and I suddenly realize
I haven't peened my tang.
- There we go. There we go.
There we go.
- Hurry up. Hurry up.
Man, you talk about waiting
till the last minute
do something like that.
- I need a solid mechanical hold
and I've got to get that done
in rapid fashion.
*
- Ten, nine, eight,
seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one.
Bladesmiths, drop your tools.
Shut down your machines.
This round is over.
*
- I was able to peen
the tang over,
but just barely in time.
Hopefully it will hold up
against the testing.
- All right, gentlemen.
This is the strength test.
To test the strength
and durability of your blades,
I'm going to baton down
through these copper pipes.
Three blows each blade.
Mark, you're up first.
You ready for this?
- Let's see it.
- Okay.
*
- Batonning is very hard
on knives,
and there is a possibility
it could break.
I'm just hoping for no failure.
Yeah.
*
- Mark, if it wasn't
for the copper on the edge here,
I wouldn't know
where it hit the pipe.
There's no chips.
No deformations.
It didn't even lose
any of its sharpness.
Nicely done.
All right, Chris.
Your turn. You ready?
*
- I'm a little bit nervous
because I'm not sure
my handle is secure
on the knife correctly.
*
- Everything's still tight.
Still feels fine in the hand.
We've got some very,
very slight chipping
and a little bit of a roll
on one side.
It's not deep but it's there.
All right, Holden, your turn.
*
- I was actually kind of
expecting, like, a police baton,
not a full baseball bat.
But, you know,
whatever works, David.
*
- Holden, first off,
your blade--
a little teeny bit of roll.
The problem is,
you no longer have a handle.
*
It cracked the first time
on the first hit.
On the third hit, though,
that handle broken right
through the pine cone.
And you can see where the frame
is really the only thing
holding it together.
And since there's no mechanical
connection from your frame
to your actual scales,
this is going to cut loose.
- My handle cracked.
I'm disappointed. This is over.
I'm done.
- Holden, your blade has
suffered a catastrophic failure
and can no longer continue
to be tested.
Therefore, it cannot
make the cut.
I have to ask you
to please leave the Forge.
- Okay.
Catastrophic failure's
kind of a bummer.
I should have taken the
extra time to correct my slabs.
Kind of a dumb move
and I guess I paid for it.
It is annoying, but, hey,
live and let learn.
- Mark, Chris, congratulations.
The strength of your weapons
has carried you
into the final round
of this competition.
Now we're sending you back
to your home forges
to recreate an iconic weapon
from history.
That weapon is...
*
The tabar-shishpar.
The tabar-shishpar
is an extremely rare weapon
that was used by mounted
warriors in India, Pakistan,
and Afghanistan
during the 1600s and 1700s.
The combination of two
deadly weapons,
the tabar's axe
was sharp and lethal
while the shishpar's mace
was just as dangerous
using blunt force
to take down opponents.
The mace could also contain up
to eight flanges
that were able
to penetrate shields
and bash through armor,
making this brutal weapon
a force to be reckoned with.
The tabar must include
a 4-inch blade,
and the shishpar portion
must include
at least five flanges.
- Part axe, part mace thing.
Hadn't heard that before.
- You will have five days
at your home forge
to complete this challenge.
At the end of five days,
you will return
and present your weapon
to our panel of expert judges.
Only after they've
tested your weapaps
will they declare one of you
the "Forged in Fire" Champion
who also leaves here
with that check for $10,000.
- I'm feeling pretty confident
I can make the thing.
I've got the "Oxford Studies
in Islamic Art, Volume 15,"
and I know there's one
of these in there.
- Good luck, bladesmiths.
We'll see you in five days.
- Good luck.
*
- It feels great to be home.
I'm making a tabar-shishpar.
I'm making everything 1/2-inch
bigger on every dimension
so that if I have to grind back
I still make the minimums.
I got a lot of metal to cut.
144 pieces total.
I'm making the weapon
out of Damascus
because it could be the thing
that tips the judges
in my favor.
I'm making more Damascus
than I need
in case something goes wrong
with one of them
I don't have to start all over.
The weapon was made
to smash armor and break skulls,
so it needs to be strong enough
yet light enough
to be an effective weapon.
It came apart.
I never saw that happen before.
Now I've wasted a billet.
There's no salvaging it.
If I burn up some more steel,
I won't have enough.
I've got to get it right
from here on out.
*
- I have to build
this tabar-shishpar.
I have never made
a bludgeoning weapon.
Today, I'm gonna work
on the shaft of this weapon.
I have material, but I don't
think it's quite tough enough.
So I'm getting another one
inside of it
to make sure that it can stand
any challenge that they give me.
It's a little bit heavier
but I think the judges
are up to that challenge.
*
I've forged the handle areas
into my shaft.
The whole shaft is as straight
as I can make it,
so we'll get ready
to heat-treat this.
I have never quenched
a hollow tube before.
Kids, don't try this at home.
*
That was exciting.
It's like Mt. Vesuvius
exploding.
It's kind of fun to watch
but a little bit scary, too.
*
There is our hardened tube
of 1084 steel.
I got a lot of work done,
but I've got a lot of work
still ahead of me.
*
- I got all the forging done.
Everything forged into
rough shape.
The first step today is get the
parts of the mace cut to shape.
So far, so good.
The five pieces have
to be consistent
so when you look at that mace
everything's perfect.
All in a row.
I'm feeling pretty good.
I'm ahead of schedule.
Finally done shaping.
Now it's time to heat-treat.
What could go wrong?
All the work so far
is coming down to this step.
If I don't get this right,
the rest of the time
will have been
for nothing, really.
Okay. Axe head's going in.
*
I got the heat-treating done.
I couldn't be happier.
- I feel like
I'm a bit ahead of my game.
Yesterday, I forged out my tabar
axe as well as the flanges.
Today, I need to do
all my heat-treating,
and that's really important.
Grab my wire
so I can do all these together
and then do the axe
'cause I want to be
a little more careful with it.
I need to focus on not
making mistakes.
Without the heat-treat,
I don't have a weapon.
*
Despite all the work I've done,
nothing matters
until this thing comes out
of that oil looking happy.
*
It's an axe.
I'm feeling really good.
I got my flanges heat-treated.
I got the axe heat-treated.
And tomorrow I can work
on assembly.
*
- I will be spending a lot
of time on the grinder today.
It's time to start
grinding things to shape.
So we're cruising downhill
from here.
*
Yeah.
For three days I was thinking,
"Everything is going
too darn smooth.
Something's gonna happen."
And it did.
- I found two cracks.
Right now,
I'm looking at two options.
I can try and make
this one work,
or start over
and make a new one.
I may be able
to save this blade.
I'm gonna cut this out
right like this.
I could cut around
the first crack
and grind out the one on top.
I'm not taking
any chances with this.
I don't want to have it
fail on me.
So I'm gonna give this thing
the toughest test
that I could give it.
*
I think it'll be good.
- I finished the mace yesterday.
I'm happy.
I need to put on an axe.
The axe head's gonna need
to be really springy
and really tough,
and it's gonna need to chop.
Maybe the meanest axe/mace combo
in the lower 48.
I got to sharpen it, test it.
Happy to be getting thisa.
You trying to help out?
I want to see what it can do.
I want to see it blow up
some produce.
*
That's a feisty melon.
And it's out of the park.
This thing is evil
and I love it.
It's a little hard to control
because of the weight
but it shouldn't be a problem.
I'm ready to win.
*
- Mark, Chris,
welcome back to the Forge.
You've both had five days
at your home forges
to work on your weapons.
Mark, how did it go?
- It was one of the most
grueling things I ever did.
I made it Damascus
for the axe head and the mace.
It was fun. I had a great time.
It was challenging.
- Chris, how did it go
at your home forge?
- I had a blast.
I've never made
one of these before,
so it was a really great
opportunity
to try something new and step
outside my comfort zone.
I wanted to make sure
that my weapon was very tough,
to make sure that it
would stand up to anything
that you guys throw at it today.
- Well, gentlemen, now it's time
for the weapons test.
Up first, everybody's favorite,
the kill test.
Doug?
*
- Bladesmiths,
the tabar-shishpar is one weapon
with multiple personalities.
To see what kind of lethal
damage your weapon will do,
I will take your tabar-shishpar
and use both ends
to deliver killing blows
on this ballistics dummy.
Mark, you're up first.
You ready?
- Mm-hmm. Let's see it.
- Let's do this.
- I am a little nervous.
Anything can happen.
Did I do everything
as good as I could do it?
*
- Well, Mark, it is sharp.
That chopped right
into the chest cavity,
breaking a bone.
This axe dug in and gutted him.
Your mace definitely will crush.
You can see the breaking bones
inside.
Your weapon will kill.
- Thank you.
- Chris, you ready?
- I am.
- Let's do this.
- I'm confident my weapon
is gonna pass
any of the performance tests.
It's just a question of whether
Mark's passes them better.
*
[laughing]
- Oh, my gosh!
Into the lung, into the heart.
Your mace definitely
penetrated through the skull.
Bones are broken.
I don't think
it's gonna end well.
You weapon is heavy
and I'm not a fan
of heavy weapons.
Only because you have
to carry it to battle.
But overall, it will kill.
- Thank you.
- I feel like
the first round went to Chris.
His weapon did more damage
on the dummy than mine.
- All right, gentlemen.
This is the sharpness test.
The tabar only has
one sharp area,
which is the axe head.
So I'll strike into this side
of beef six times
with each of your axes.
Mark, you're up first.
Are you ready for this?
- Mm-hmm.
- Okay.
*
Your weapon's nice and light
for a weapon that looks as heavy
as this is.
You can see that this went
right through the ribs.
This is definitely a cutter.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Chris, you ready?
- Let's do it.
- Okay.
- Listening to the feedback
for Mark's weapon,
I'm really nervous.
I hope mine lives up
to the same performance.
*
[laughs]
- Well, right off,
the weight difference--
I mean, this thing
hits like a ton.
These hooks tear meat
coming out the back way.
Your edge--there's no damage
that I can feel.
It's heavy,
but it does a hell of a lot of
damage.
Nicely done.
- Thank you.
The weight of my axe,
I'm hoping that its performance
makes up for the fact
that it's a little harder to
use than what they're used to.
- All right, gentlemen.
This is the strength test.
Now, to test the strength
and durability
of your tabar-shishpars,
I'll be using all parts of it
to strike this suit of armor.
Mark, you're up. You ready?
- Yes, I am. Let's see it.
- The real concern of mine
is retaining the edge
on my axe head.
*
- Edge is still perfect.
No chips. No rolling.
The hammer gave that armor
a nice dent.
Didn't take any damage.
The mace is fine.
The guy inside there
was not happy.
- [laughs]
- All right, Chris.
You ready for this?
- Don't hold back.
- I'm not gonna.
*
[heavy rock music]
This is a heavy weapon.
- Yeah.
- I mean, I can control it,
but I don't have any rebound.
And you got just the smallest
bit of edge deformation here.
Other than that,
the mace is a devastator.
You made a beautiful piece.
- Thank you.
I hope the judges
appreciate the devastation
my weapon's capable of bringing.
It's hard to say
who's gonna win.
- Bladesmiths, the judges'
deliberation is complete,
and there can only be one
"Forged in Fire" Champion.
And that champion is...
*
Mark. Congratulations.
You are the "Forged
in Fire" Champion.
- Thank you.
Good job, buddy.
- Thanks.
- Chris, your blade
did not make the cut.
David Baker will explain.
- Chris, Doug and I both agree
that the extreme weight
of your weapon
made it difficult to control,
and frankly, I'm still
feeling it in my arm.
That, combined with that minor
edge damage
you took in the strength test,
those are the reasons
we're letting you go.
- Understood.
- Chris, it's that time.
Please surrender your weapon.
*
- Ahh!
[laughs]
Sorry.
I just--
[laughing]
[sighs]
I think I put up the best
I was capable of
in the time that I was given.
- See you later, buddy.
- Congratulations.
Mark did good work,
and his was just
a little bit better.
*
- Mark, congratulations, you are
the "Forged in Fire" Champion
and will be receiving
a check for $10,000.
Good job.
[applause]
How do you feel right now?
- I feel great.
Chris, hell of an opponent.
I'm glad it went
to the very end.
I wanted to see
a real competition.
- Mark, please present
your weapon to the judges
and shake our hands.
- I won. I am the champion.
[sighs]
Unbelievable.
I just won $10,000.
My wife and I, we made a deal.
She gets $9,000,
and I get $1,000.
So congratulations, dear.
*